Clarify group synchronization behavior (#499)
KhronosGroup/SYCL-Docs: adoc/chapters/programming_interface.adoc

work-items (such as <<group-barrier,group barriers>> and collective operations).
These group functions act as _synchronization points_ and must be encountered in
converged <<control-flow>> by all work-items in the group.

The behavior of every group function is as follows:

  * Each work-item in the group arrives at the synchronization point associated
    with the group function, then blocks until any operation(s) specified by the
    group function have completed.

>   * Once all work-items in the group have arrived, an implementation-defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Once all work-items in the group have arrived, an unspecified
```

Kind of a nit, but I don't think we need implementations to document this subset of work-items.

Author: Good catch!

work-items in group [code]#g#, and [code]#pred# must be an immutable callable
with the same type and state for all work-items in group [code]#g#.

> _Effects:_ Blocks until all work-items in group [code]#g# have reached this

Author: Good catch.

I think it's actually the barrier sentence that is wrong, so I changed that one (to remove "this work-item") in https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SYCL-Docs/pull/499/commits/d1388096494d14b8555a8a87a0e6e5ef8a9829a3.  C++ doesn't say "blocks this thread" (for example, see [here](https://eel.is/c++draft/thread.barrier.class#20)) so I think "this work-item" is implied.

Note that [code]#first# may be equal to [code]#result#.
====

_Effects:_ Blocks until all work-items in group [code]#g# have reached this
synchronization point, then executes the algorithm.

The value written to [code]#result# + _i_ is the exclusive scan of the values
resulting from dereferencing the first _i_ values in the range [code]#[first,
last)# and an initial value specified by [code]#init#, using the operator
[code]#binary_op#.
The scan is computed using a generalized noncommutative sum as defined in
standard {cpp}.

> _Synchronization:_ The call to this function in each work-item happens before

Reviewer 2: Should we say that we put a "barrier" before and after the execution? Or do you prefer to not rely on previous concepts? 

BTW It makes me wonder why those function doesn't take a scope...

Author: > Should we say that we put a "barrier" before and after the execution? Or do you prefer to not rely on previous concepts?

Relying on previous concepts is fine, but I don't think we want to refer back to barrier here.  I'm concerned that this might be too restrictive.  Implementations shouldn't have to generate barriers when they're not needed (e.g., for back-to-back algorithms) and there may be some clever alternative implementations that don't need barriers for some algorithms (I'm not sure what they are, but I don't want to rule out the possibility).

> BTW It makes me wonder why those function doesn't take a scope...

I think this is primarily because the group algorithms were designed to align with the equivalents from the C++ standard algorithms (which don't take a scope parameter).

I agree that the fact there's no scope is inconsistent, but that might just be something we need to revisit for barriers.  I'm not sure why OpenCL's barrier supports a scope, and I'm not sure I've ever seen anybody use `group_barrier` with a non-default scope argument.

Reviewer 2: >  Relying on previous concepts is fine, but I don't think we want to refer back to barrier here. I'm concerned that this might be too restrictive. Implementations shouldn't have to generate barriers when they're not needed (e.g., for back-to-back algorithms) and there may be some clever alternative implementations that don't need barriers for some algorithms (I'm not sure what they are, but I don't want to rule out the possibility).

I see, I was thinking that the phrasing is strictly equivalent to the barrier one. For example for the effect it's said:

>_Effects:_ Blocks until all work-items in group [code]#g# have reached this
synchronization point. then executes the algorithm.

Who can be verbatim be replaced by `_Effet_: Execute a barrier, then executes the algorithm.`

The different for the sync is

> The call to [code]#group_barrier# in each work-item happens before any work-item blocking on the same synchronization point is unblocked
versus
> The call to this function in each work-item happens before the algorithm begins execution.

The difference is that " any work-item blocking on the same synchronization point is unblocked" versus "algorithm begins execution".  It seem weird to me that the "effect are" the same, but the `synchronization` rules are slightly different. 

(And to be honest `The call to this function in each work item happens before the algorithm begins execution.` doesn't seem clear to me. One interpretation of this sentence is that is instruction is "volatile" and the instructions should not be re-ordened / executed out of order. This is of course *not* what is implied. But the semantic difference between this and a barrier and unclear to me) 

Also Implement should also be able to optimie 2 back-to-back calls to barrier.  IMO in the spec when we refer to `function`, we refer to their semantic not to their implementation. Implementers are free to have multiple `barrier` implementations, and implement any barrier optimization is that doesn't break the rules. 

>I agree that the fact there's no scope is inconsistent, but that might just be something we need to revisit for barriers. I'm not sure why OpenCL's barrier supports a scope, and I'm not sure I've ever seen anybody use group_barrier with a non-default scope argument.

Deal! Let remove it :D

Author: > The difference is " any work-item blocking on the same synchronization point is unblocked" versus "algorithm begins execution". It seems weird to me that the effect are the same, but the synchronization rules are slightly different. The semantic difference between this and a barrier and unclear to me

The behavior of a barrier is:
- A work-item calls `group_barrier`, then waits for all the other work-items to arrive
- Once all the work-items have arrived, any work-item that is waiting can continue execution

The behavior of an algorithm is:
- A work-item calls the function, then waits for all the other work-items to arrive
- Once all the work-items have arrived, the algorithm is executed
- Once the algorithm has executed, any work-item that is waiting can continue execution

(How many work-items in the group execute the algorithm is an implementation detail, which is why I'm just saying "the algorithm is executed" instead of detailing exactly how the algorithm is divided across work-items.)

I wasn't really sure how to divide things up into _Effects_, _Synchronization_, etc, but I've tried to follow the ISO C++ definition of `std::barrier`.

`group_barrier` is like `arrive_and_wait`, which is defined [here](https://eel.is/c++draft/thread.barrier.class#23) as being an `arrive` followed by a `wait`.  `arrive` has a _Synchronization_ section [here](https://eel.is/c++draft/thread.barrier.class#14) that says the call happens before the barrier completes.  `wait` has an _Effects_ section [here](https://eel.is/c++draft/thread.barrier.class#20) that says the call blocks.  I tried to mirror that in the `group_barrier` definition -- we can't use the "equivalent to" wording, because SYCL doesn't have split barriers.

Group algorithms are like a `std::barrier` with a completion function (where the completion function is the algorithm).  So, I've tried to follow the ISO C++ definition, but substituting "algorithm" instead of "completion function".

Does that make things clearer?  There might be more from those sections that we need to copy across...

> (And to be honest The call to this function in each work item happens before the algorithm begins execution. doesn't seem clear to me. One interpretation of this sentence is that this instruction is "volatile" and all the instructions should not be re-ordened / executed out of order. This is of course not what is implied here )

The intent here is that if one work-item in the group thinks something "happened before" the algorithm starts executing, then the algorithm execution will be able to observe it.  Consider something like:

```c++
for (i = it.get_local_id(); i < N; i += it.get_local_range()) {
  input[i] = /* something */;
  output[i] = 0;
}
sycl::joint_exclusive_scan(input, input + N, output, sycl::plus<>()); 
```

The specification doesn't make any guarantees about which values of the input and output array will be assigned to which work-items.  But we need to guarantee that once all the work-items have called `joint_exclusive_scan`, whichever work-items actually perform the scan operation can "see" all the input values.  Similarly, we need to guarantee that once all the work-items have been unblocked, all work-items in the group can "see" all the output values.

i.e., all the writes to `input` happen before the algorithm starts executing, and the completion of the algorithm happens before any work-item is unblocked.

Reviewer 2: Thanks a lot for the reply! 

I like the "Group algorithms are like a std::barrier with a completion function (where the completion function is the algorithm)." Clear and unambiguous. 

I  found the term " completion of the algorithm " unclear. Completion of one work item? All the work items? All the work items on the group? Completion in the sense that the instructions where issued? Or all the data need to have been "seen".

The C++ spec said, for the completion function: "The end of the completion step strongly happens before the returns from all calls that were unblocked by the completion step[.](https://eel.is/c++draft/thread.barrier.class#3.sentence-2)" 

I like the `all calls that were unblocked by the completion step`, make it super clear. 

Do you think we can do the same? Define a "general barrier" abstract concept that takes a completion function.
 
Then said that our `group_barrier` is a barrier without a completion function and that all the other algorithms are just a "general barrier" with the correct algorithm as a completion function? With that, we can potentially remove all the `_synchronization_` part for the barrier and algorithm

Author: I do think that's the right long-term direction.  We have a proposed extension ([sycl_ext_oneapi_barrier](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_barrier.asciidoc)) that would introduce functions like `group_arrive` and `group_wait` as well as `barrier` objects, which would make it possible to describe `group_barrier` in terms of those operations.

I'm a little concerned about defining a barrier as an abstract concept here (in SYCL 2020) since we know that it will conflict with `std::barrier` (and potentially `sycl::barrier`) if a future version of SYCL decides to adopt C++20 as its base language.

For now, would it be sufficient to:
- Add a section clarifying what it means for an algorithm to complete
- Work in the "all calls that were unblocked by the completion step" wording
- Add a non-normative note drawing a comparison with `std::barrier` as introduced in C++20

I think it's okay to reference `std::barrier` in a non-normative note.  Making the link might help people understand what's going on, and also give some clues as to where we might go.

Reviewer 2: Perfect! Thanks. Sorry to be so anal about it. Really appreciate the past PR you did, it really improved the spec IMO :)

Reviewer 2: I think that we are good!  Thanks to the `The behavior of every group function is as follows:` paragraph, all my unclearness has been resolved.
